- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science based tools
for everyday life.
[Upbeat music]
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a Professor of
Neurobiology and Ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are going to
talk about the biology,
psychology and utility of play.
Play is something that
normally we associate
with children's games
and indeed with being a child,
much of our childhood
development centers around play,
whether or not it's organized play
or spontaneous play,
but as adults, we also need to play.
And today I'm going to talk about
what I like to refer to
as The Power of Play.
The Power of Play,
resides in plays ability
to change our nervous system
for the better,
so that we can perform many activities,
not just play activities, better.
Play can also function
as a way to explore new ways of being
in different scenarios in work,
in relationships, in settings of all kind,
and indeed also in the
relationship to oneself.
In fact,
we are going to explore how
assuming different identities
during the same game of play
or the same forms of play
has been shown to be immensely powerful
for allowing people
to engage in more creative thinking
and dynamic thinking and
indeed to better leaders
and more effective workers
and students and learners
and happier people.
I'm also going to cover
some data that shows
that learning to play properly
can enhance one's ability to focus
and is an active area of research
for treatment of things like ADHD,
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,
just as a little sneak preview
of where that's headed,
children who do not access enough play
during certain stages of childhood
are more prone to develop ADHD.
The good news,
is all of us regardless of
whether or not we have ADHD
or not,
whether or not we had ample access to play
during childhood or not,
can engage and grow the neural circuits
that allow for this
incredible power of play.
And this can be done again
at any stage of life today.
We're going to talk about the protocols,
the science, we will review all of that.
And I promise you'll come away
with a lot of knowledge,
whether or not you're a parent,
whether or not you're a child,
whether or not you're a person of any age,
you're going to have tools
and knowledge that will benefit you.
Before we begin,
I want to share with you
the results of what I think
to be an extremely exciting
and certainly an actionable study
that was just published in the
journal Scientific Reports.
This is an excellent journal
Nature Press journal,
Peer Reviewed, et cetera,
and the finding center around
what sorts of devices we
happen to be reading on
and accessing information on
and how that's impacting our physiology
and our capacity to learn.
One of the more frequent questions I get
is what are all these
devices, phones, tablets,
computers, video games et cetera,
doing to our brains.
And finally,
there's some good Peer reviewed data
to look at that and to
address it directly.
This study, first author Honma
H O N M A
Honma et al,
is entitled
"Reading on a smartphone
affects sigh generation.
That's SIGH sigh generation
brain activity and comprehension."
And to just summarize what they found,
they ran a study on 34 healthy individuals
and had them either read
material on a smartphone
or on regular printed paper or a book.
And what they found is that
comprehension on devices
in particular smartphones
is much poorer much worse than it is
when one reads on actual paper.
Now some of you may
experience this yourselves.
Now they compared smartphones with paper.
And what they found was
that when they looked
at people's breathing,
the normal patterns of breathing
that people were engaging in
did not differ between people
reading on a smartphone
or reading from paper.
However, one particular feature
of breathing did differ.
And that particular
feature is what we call
physiological sighs.
I've talked a lot about
physiological sighs on this podcast,
and on social media,
we had a terrific guest,
Professor, Jack Feldman from
University of California Los Angeles.
Who's a world expert in
breathing and respiration
and its impacts on the brain
and how brain controls
breathing and respiration
and what you can learn from that episode.
Or I'll just tell you again right now,
is that every five minutes or so,
whether or not we are asleep or awake,
we do what's called a physiological sigh,
which is a big, deep inhale,
often a double inhale
followed by a long exhale.
It goes something like this.
[Inhaling]
[Sighs]
Now you might think, oh,
I never breathe like that,
but you do,
unless there's something severely
wrong with your brain stem
every five minutes or so
you do one of these physiological sighs,
which reopens all the little
hundreds of millions of sacks
in your lungs called alveoli
that bring in more oxygen
as a consequence of that
big deep, double inhale.
And then you are able to
exhale carbon dioxide,
offload carbon dioxide
through that long exhale.
I've also encouraged people
to use the physiological sigh
deliberately,
not just spontaneously
as a way to reduce their stress quickly.
And indeed my lab works
on physiological sighs
and it's been exploring this
and they're quite effective in reducing
our stress very fast.
Reading on our smartphone,
seems to suppress physiological sigh.
People aren't aware that it's happening,
but it's happening.
Some people have talked
about so-called email apnea,
which is the fact that
people hold their breath
while they email or while they text.
And indeed many people do that.
This is distinct from
email or texting apnea.
What's happening here is
people are reading on the phone
and for whatever reason,
and I'll talk about what
the likely reason is,
but for whatever reason,
they're suppressing their sighing
And as a consequence,
the brain is not getting enough oxygen
and is not offloading
enough carbon dioxide.
And another finding in this study,
was that the prefrontal cortex,
an area of the brain that's
involved in focus and attention
and learning
becomes hyperactive in a kind
of desperate attempt to focus.
All of this can be summarized by saying,
if you happen to read on a device,
whether or not it's a tablet,
a standard computer screen of any kind,
but in particular on a smart phone,
regardless of how small or
large that smartphone screen is,
you want to remind yourself
to engage in these physiological
sighs fairly regularly.
And it might even be better to just
read the most or at least the key issues
and things that you're trying to learn
about the key information from paper,
either books or printed out material
of some other sort.
What's the underlying mechanism here?
Well,
one of the reasons I
like this study so much,
is that it brings together
two of my laboratories
and my particular
interests in neuroscience,
which is how does our visual system
and the aperture meaning the
size of our visual window
relate to our so-called autonomic function
or our internal state.
And basically what's happening here is
as any of us bring our visual
window in more narrowly
as we contract our visual window,
which is exactly what happens
when we're looking at a little
smartphone in front of us.
It seems to suppress
the breathing apparatus
because we know that physiological sighs
are controlled by a
specific set of neurons
in the brain stem called
the parafacial nucleus
discovered by Dr. Jack Feldman.
And so there must be a mechanism whereby
when we tighten our visual window,
we somehow, and we don't
know yet how this happens,
but somehow suppress the
activity of these neurons
in the parafacial nucleus
that generate this physiological sighs.
So again,
you have two choices or I
suppose you have many choices,
but two main choices
to contend with this new information.
One is that you remind yourself
to engage in deep breathing
and in particular, physiological sighs
every five minutes or so,
while reading anything or
texting on your smartphone,
the other would be,
again, if there's material
that you really need to learn
for sake of regurgitation later,
or for something particularly important,
try and read that from
either a larger screen
or even better would be from
printed materials or books.
Another reason I bring all that up
is that it relates to a larger theme,
which is that I get many,
many questions about ADHD
and about people's challenges with focus
and much of what we're
told these days is that
we are challenged with focus
because of the hundreds of videos
that we can see streaming by
us in any moment on our phone,
which probably is true.
The fact that the information
that we're reading
on the internet and on our phones
is emotionally disturbing
or distressing in some way.
And that probably is true
as well in many cases.
This study really points to
the fact that independent
of the information that we are looking at
or consuming
independent whether or
not it's movies or texts
or anything of that sort,
the mere size of the window, the aperture,
the screen that we are looking at
is also strongly impacting
our ability to learn
and remember information.
So broaden that visual window
print things out,
look at a book.
I didn't design the system.
I always say, you know,
however our visual system
and respiratory system
happened to evolve.
I wasn't consulted at the design phase.
This is just simply how
your brain circuits work.
So if you want to learn things,
widen that visual window and
even better print things out,
pick up a book or read on a tablet even,
but try and make that tablet larger
than a smartphone screen size.
Before we begin our discussion
about The Power of Play,
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however,
part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer
information about science
and science related tools
to the general public
in keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic
Greens also now called AG1.
I started drinking Athletic
Greens way back in 2012.
And so I'm delighted that
they're sponsoring the podcast.
Athletic Greens is an all in one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
The reason I started drinking it in 2012,
and the reason that I still
drink it once or twice a day,
is that with Athletic Greens,
I cover all of my basic
foundational vitamin mineral
probiotic needs.
It's filled with adaptogens for recovery.
The probiotics are particularly important
because they encourage health
of the so-called gut microbiome.
We're going to be talking a
lot about the gut microbiome
on this podcast in the
weeks and months to come,
but to make a long story short,
we have a lot of bacteria
living in our gut
that are healthy bacteria
that support them like
digestion immune system,
metabolic function, hormone systems.
And perhaps most interestingly to me,
the gut microbiome
supports brain function,
including mood cognition and so forth.
The probiotics in Athletic Greens
strongly support the gut microbiome
and thereby the other systems of the body,
including the gut brain access,
which I just referred to.
If you like to try Athletic Greens again,
also called AG1,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim a special offer.
They're giving away five free travel packs
and a year supply of vitamin D3, K2,
vitamin D3 is extremely important
for many biological functions.
We are told that we can get
enough D3 from sun exposure,
but many of us we're getting sun exposure.
And many of us who are not
getting enough sun exposure
still don't have ample
levels of vitamin D3
So supplementing with
vitamin D3 is necessary
for many many people.
And K2 is important for
cardiovascular function
for proper calcium balance, et cetera.
So again, if you go to
athleticgreens.com/huberman,
you can get the five free travel packs
a year supply of vitamin the D3 K2,
and of course your Athletic Greens.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by ROKA.
ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime
working on the visual system.
And one of the many challenges
that your visual system
has to deal with
is for instance, when you
move from a bright environment
to a dimer environment, you have to adapt.
You have have to be able
to see things clearly,
many sunglasses and eyeglasses
don't allow that adaptation
to occur seamlessly,
ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses
allow that to occur in
concert with your biology
and in a way that makes it very seamless.
You just don't notice
the transition at all,
which is wonderful.
I love it 'cause I don't have
to constantly be taking off
and putting on my
sunglasses when I'm outside.
I happen to wear readers at
night, eye glass readers.
It's also terrific as the luminance
in your environment changes.
So they work under low luminance,
high luminance, et cetera.
They're very lightweight.
In fact, you can wear them
when running, when cycling,
they were designed by
two All-American swimmers
from Stanford.
And so originally they were designed
for the purpose of being
worn during exercise,
but you can wear them anywhere.
They have a great aesthetic,
so you can wear them to dinner,
to work, et cetera.
And while a lot of performance
eyeglasses out there,
in my opinion, make
people look like cyborgs,
ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses
have just a terrific aesthetic
that you can wear truly anywhere.
If you'd like to try ROKA glasses,
you can go to roka.com that's ROKA.com
and enter the code Huberman
to get 20% off your first order.
Again, that's ROKA ROKA.com
and enter the code Huberman
at checkout.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Helix Sleep.
Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows
that are second to none.
I started sleeping on a Helix
mattress about a year ago now,
and it's the best sleep
that I've ever had.
What's unique about Helix mattresses
is that they tailor their
mattresses to your sleep needs.
So if you go to their website,
you can take a brief two minute quiz
that asks questions like,
do you sleep on your stomach
or your back or on your
side, maybe you don't know,
do you tend to run hot or
cold throughout the night?
Or maybe you don't know,
and it matches you to the mattress.
that's perfect for your sleep needs.
I matched to the so-called Dusk mattress,
D U S K,
because I wanted a mattress
that wasn't too firm
and not too soft.
And so I sleep on a Dusk mattress.
You should figure out what
mattress would be ideal for you.
If you're interested in
upgrading your mattress,
you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman,
take their two minute sleep quiz
and the match you to
a customized mattress.
And you'll get up to $200 off
any of your mattress orders
and two free pillows.
Again, that's $200 off
The pillows are excellent.
I also use Helix pillows.
They have a 10 year warranty.
You get to try out the mattress
for up to a hundred nights, risk free.
If you don't like it,
they'll come pick it up,
take it away.
But I think you'll love it.
Again if interested,
you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman.
There can get up to $200 off
and the two free pillows.
Let's talk about play.
Now in researching this episode,
I thought that I was going to
come across a bunch of papers
that say this brain area
connects to that brain area,
which controls play in animals.
And there's similar areas
in babies and in adults.
And indeed, that's true.
And we will talk about brain circuitry,
but I think more
importantly is to understand
what is the utility of play?
You know, why do we
play when we're younger?
Why do we tend to play
less as we get older?
And what in the world is play for?
Some of us would be
categorized as more playful.
I'm sure that you know, people like this,
maybe you are like this
people that can walk into a room,
a social setting of any kind,
and they seem to already
kind of have a playful,
maybe even a mischievous
quality about them.
We'll talk about mischief
a little bit later,
but they sort of look at an environment
or a social setting as an opportunity
for different kinds of novel interactions.
Other people and I'd probably
put myself into this category.
If I walk into a novel environment,
I tend to be more in the
mode of just assessing
what that environment is like.
I'm not a particularly
spontaneously playful person,
although around certain individuals,
I might be more spontaneously playful.
We are all on a continuum
of this kind of seriousness
to playful nature.
Turns out that all young animals,
including humans
have more playfulness and tend to engage
in more spontaneous play
in their earlier years
than in their later years.
And therein lies a very interesting portal
to understanding what the utility,
what the purpose of play is.
First of all,
I want to lay down a couple
of key facts about play
that point to the fact that
play is not just about games.
Play is about much, much more
and play and in particular,
how we played as a child
and still how we can play as adults
is really how we test
and expand our potential roles
in all kinds of interactions.
One of the most important,
interesting and surprising
features of play
that I'd like everyone to know about
is that it is homeostatically regulated.
Some of you are familiar
with the term homeostasis.
Homeostasis is just this
aspect of biological systems
to try and remain in balance.
You know, if you stay awake
for a long period of time,
you tend to want to sleep
for a long period of time.
If you slept for a long period of time
and you're very rested,
then you tend to be very
energetic the next day.
And of course, I know people
out there will immediately say,
oh, well, if I sleep too long,
then I'm groggy the next day.
Of course there are exceptions,
but in general,
sleep and wakefulness are
in homeostatic balance.
Thirst and water consumption
are in homeostatic balance.
If you don't drink any fluids for a while,
you tend to get more thirsty,
you drink fluids
and your thirst tends to diminish
likewise with food.
Likewise, with most all
motivated behaviors.
Well,
one of the most important discoveries
of the last century,
was largely the work of a
guy named Jaak Panksepp.
No, it's not Jack it's Jaak Panksepp
who really pioneered this understanding
of the biology of play
and relating that to
the psychology of play
in animals and humans.
He's considered kind of
luminary in the field of play,
and what a great title to have, right?
If you could have a title
and be a scientific luminary,
you might as well be the, the play guy.
In fact he was known and I'll
get into this later as to why,
but he was known as the "Rat Tickler"
because he tickled rats.
And he actually found that
rodents and animals of many kind
generate laughter in response to tickling.
And in fact,
they don't have the capacity
to tickle themselves
something we'll also
talk about why that is.
And he was called the "Rat tickler,"
but then he discovered that
many species of animals
engage in laughter in response to tickling
and they tickle each other.
And the reason you don't
hear them laughing,
no you can't hear your dog laughing
that isn't laughing it's something else
is that most animals besides humans laugh
at kind of ultrasonic
levels of auditory output.
Meaning the frequencies
of sound are just too high
for you to hear,
but with the appropriate devices,
he was able with his colleagues
to isolate this so-called
the "Rat Laughter"
and then turns out there's kitten laughter
and there's puppy laughter.
And of course there's human laughter.
So Jaak Panksepp was a very interesting
and pioneering person in this field.
And he also discovered that play
is homeostatically regulated.
Meaning if animals including children
are restricted from playing
for a certain amount of time,
they will play more when
given the opportunity
in the same way that
if I food restrict you
for a long period of time,
you'll eat more when you
are finally allowed to eat.
Now this is important
because it moves this thing that we call
play from the dimension
of higher order functions
or things evolved recently,
you know, that are really
kind of at the front edge
of human evolution,
deeper into the circuitry of the brain,
whereby we say the brain stem,
the kind of ancient parts of the brain
are going to be involved.
And in fact, that's the case
as we're going to learn
later in the podcast,
play is generated through the connectivity
of many brain areas.
But one of the key brain areas
is an area called PAG Periaqueductal Gray.
The Periaqueductal Gray
is a brain stem area.
So it's pretty far back
as the brain kind of transitions
into the spinal cord.
And it's rich with neurons
that make endogenous opioids.
So these are not the kinds of opioids
that are causing the opioid crisis.
These are neurons that you and I all have
that release endogenous, meaning self-made
or biologically made opioids.
They go by names like enkephalin
and things of that sort.
Play evokes small amounts of
opioid release into the system.
They kind of dope you up a little bit,
not so much as one would see if
one were to take exogenous opioids.
And in fact exogenous
opioids as we now know,
are potentially very hazardous,
highly high addiction potential
high overdose potential.
They cause all sorts of problems.
Yes there are clinical uses for them,
but they're causing a
lot of problems nowadays,
but these endogenous opioids
are released in children and adults
anytime we engage in play.
And that turns out to be a
very important chemical state
because there's something about
having an abundance of
these endogenous opioids
released into the brain
that allows other areas of the brain,
like the prefrontal cortex,
the area of the front that's responsible
for what we call executive function.
Executive function is the
ability to make predictions,
to assess contingencies.
Like if I do this,
then that happens.
If I do that, then that happens.
Well prefrontal cortex is often seen
as a kind of rigid executive
of the whole brain.
That's one way to view it,
but probably a better way to view it
is that the prefrontal cortex works
in concert with these other
are more primitive circuitries.
And when the periaqueductal gray releases
these endogenous opioids during play,
the prefrontal cortex, doesn't get stupid.
It actually gets smarter.
It develops the ability
to take on different roles
and explore different contingencies.
And we're going to talk about role play
later in different contexts.
And what we will find
is that so much of play
is really about exploring things in a way
that feels safe enough to explore, right?
This is not what happens
when we drive down the street
or when we bike down the street,
when we are headed to work,
commuting on our bicycle
or walking or driving,
we tend to be very linear
and we tend to be very goal directed.
We're not going to just take
a new street just because
we're not going to be
spontaneously riding in the middle
of the road
and then on the sidewalk
and then back and forth.
Although I can remember as a kid,
I was doing some of that.
I like to jump off curb
cuts when I was a kid.
And then eventually I
graduated, sorry to the cyclist,
but I graduated to skateboarding.
And then I look on skateboarding.
You're always kind of exploring terrain,
but you know, as I got older,
actually I find myself
becoming much more linear.
I just don't play with
my commute very much.
It's really just about getting
to work and then working.
When endogenous opioids are in our system,
when we're in this mode of play,
the prefrontal cortex starts seeing
and exploring many more
possibilities of how we interact
with our environment,
with others and the roles that
we can assume for ourselves.
And so we're going to dissect one by one,
the different aspects of play,
role play, social play,
individual play, imaginary
play, competitive play
they are enormous number
of dimensions of play.
And by the end of this episode,
we are going to arrive
at a very key feature.
The key feature is one that's called
your personal play identity.
All of us have what we call
a personal play identity.
This personal play identity
was laid down during development.
And it is the identity that you
assume in playful scenarios.
And it is identity that you
adopt in non playful scenarios.
Now the great news is that
your personal play identity
is plastic throughout
your entire lifespan.
You can adjust your personal play identity
in ways that will benefit
you in work in relationships
and your overall level of happiness.
We will discuss protocols
and ways to do that.
But I do want to give
a nod to the late jack,
Jaak excuse me,
Jaak Panksepp, "The rat tickler."
And I also want to just give
a nod to play generally,
as we move forward in the discussion.
What I'd love for everyone to do
is to stop thinking about
play as just a child activity,
not just a sport related activity,
but really as an exploration
in contingencies.
Again, it's an exploration of,
if I do A, what happens?
If I do B, what happens?
If someone else takes on
behavior or attitude C
what am I going to do?
And play is really where
we can expand our catalog
of potential outcomes,
and it can be enormously enriching.
And indeed as we'll talk about
the tinkerers of the world,
the true creatives,
the people that building
incredible technologies and art,
and also that just have incredibly rich,
emotional and intellectual
and social lives
all have a strong element of play.
And so today I hope to convince you
of some protocols that
will allow you to expand
your various roles in life,
through the portal of play.
So we establish that play is homeostatic,
meaning we all need to do it.
Many of us, including myself,
haven't played that much as adults.
We're all pretty busy.
Number of us are stressed.
We got a lot to do in life,
but as children,
most all of us engage in a lot of play.
And in looking at the way
that very young children
and especially toddlers play,
we can learn a lot
because it reveals the fundamental rules
by which the toddler brain
interacts with the world.
Now,
one of the key things
about the baby brain
is that the baby brain somehow
knows that it can't do
everything in the world, right?
If a baby needs something,
it generally will cry or make
some sort of vocalization
or some sort of facial expression
or combination of those.
And the caretaker, whoever
that may be will provide it.
This is an ancient hard wired mechanism
whereby the so-called
autonomic nervous system
that generates stress
will create this kind of
whining and discomfort,
maybe arriving,
maybe the baby gets
kind of red in the face
and the caretaker delivers some thing
based on a good guess
of what that baby needs.
So maybe it's breast milk,
maybe it's bottle milk.
Maybe it's a diaper change.
Maybe it's to be warmed
up if the baby is cold,
maybe it's to be cooled
down if the baby's too warm,
maybe if the baby's in
its a little onesie thing,
it's feeling restricted
and it just wants to move
and they'll get taken out of their,
their crib or their stroller,
whatever it is and allowed
to stretch out on the floor.
Remember the baby doesn't
know exactly what it needs.
It only knows the state of discomfort.
And of course we don't know
exactly what babies and toddlers
are thinking
because they can't express
themselves with language yet.
But what's key to understand
is the rule or the
contingency that is set up
in that scenario.
In that scenario,
the child feels some discomfort
expresses that discomfort verbally
or through a facial expression or both
and then some force some
person from the outside world
resolves it.
And so the very young baby
and indeed many children
up to certain ages
and let's confess many adults
are not able to meet or
adjust their internal states
of stress.
And so they look to
things outside of them.
That's the first rule,
the fundamental rule
that we all learn when we come into life,
that when in a state of discomfort
to look outside our immediate biology,
beyond the confines of our
skin and find a solution,
a sip of water for adults,
it might be sip of alcohol,
right?
Probably not the best
tool to relieve stress,
but that's one that many people do.
In fact engaging for
the baby that's hungry.
The bottle milk comes from the outside.
As we gain more proficiency
in moving through life
and we can get things for ourselves.
We still often bring things
from the external world in
to resolve this what I'm calling
autonomic discomfort or
autonomic dysregulation.
That's not a game, but that's a rule.
As we advance from infant to toddler,
we start to think more
in terms of where we are
and what we own relative to
what's out there in the world.
And now in the world of child psychology,
there's a somewhat famous poem
that was written by a
research child psychologist.
His name was Burton White,
and he wrote a poem called
"The Toddlers Creed"
"The Toddlers Creed" defines well,
what the rules and
contingencies of play are
in very young children.
And it reveals to us just how narrow
and limited their world view is
and how self entered their world is.
So "The Toddlers Creed" read quickly,
cuz' I don't want to take up
too much time with this is.
"If I want it.
It's mine.
If I give it to you and
change my mind later,
it's mine."
For anyone that's played with a toddler,
you can imagine this in your mind.
"If I can take it away
from you, it's mine.
If I had a little while ago, it's mine.
If we are building something together,
all the pieces are mine.
If it looks just like mine,
it's mine.
If it's mine, it will never
belong to anyone else,
no matter what."
And of course, as we hear this
sounds quite awful, right?
And yet this is actually
a reflection of what
a healthy toddler would
think about the world.
That the objects and things,
and even the people in
the world are theirs,
that they are actually
possessions that belong to them.
Now of course,
some people never actually
transition beyond this stage
of moral and social development.
And there are indeed some adults
that fit "The Toddlers Creed."
And you're welcome to
share this with them.
If ever you think that
it might be of benefit
to their self-reflection.
But in all seriousness Burton White's
"Toddlers Creed" is really grounded
in this transition from
when we are infants.
And we have to have
things delivered to us,
to the point where we are toddlers
and we can access things in the world,
but we tend to assume
that they are all ours.
And then the next stage
is the really key stage
as it relates to play
because is in the next
stage of development
is where young children start
to interact with other children
and there's an exchange and a possession
and then a letting go of certain things,
learning that not everything is yours
and that the entire world is not about you
is one of the key contingencies
that is established during play.
It's one of the key way
in which children go
from being very self-centered
and basically unable to
engage with other kids
for very long,
without some sort of eruption of crying
and some sort of battle of, you know,
kind of push pull over an object
to things like sharing and
things like cooperative play.
So as we transition from forms of play
that are all about the self
that are all me, me, me, me,
"The Toddlers Creed"
to forms of play that involve
some discomfort in assuming roles
that maybe we don't want and
not getting what we want.
It's really an opportunity for the brain
to start to explore different
roles that people take,
how they work as individuals
and as pairs and in larger groups.
And to do that in a low
stakes environment, right?
You wouldn't want this to be worked out
on the battlefield or
when searching for food
or in some high stakes environment
where the survival of the
species was important.
It appears that these
circuitry for play evolved.
So that rules and contingencies
around who's most important,
whether or not the group is important,
whether or not individuals
are going to be leaders
or followers, et cetera,
that can be explored in
a low stakes environment.
Now there are hundreds of
different types of play
and hundreds of different
types of contingency testing.
But the key theme here is that
play allows children and
adults for that matter
to explore different outcomes
in a kind of low stakes environment.
If you're playing a board
game or a card game,
you might get really into that game,
but unless there's a lot of
money on the table, so to speak,
or you're really playing
for something important
or unless your ego is swollen
way out of proportion,
to reality,
if you lose, you might
not feel good about it,
but it's truly not the end of the world.
And if you win,
you might feel really good about it,
but you're not really incredible.
You were just incredible in
that particular situation
for that particular moment,
it doesn't really transform
the rest of your life,
unless that game is of a
particular type for sport
for instance.
We'll talk about sport later.
So the key theme here is that
play is contingency testing.
play is contingency
testing under conditions
where the stakes are sufficiently low,
that individuals should feel comfortable
assuming different roles,
even roles that they're
not entirely comfortable
within their outside life.
And that all relates again
to the release of these
endogenous opioids,
in this brain center periaqueductal gray
and the way that it allows
the prefrontal cortex
in a very direct way I mean,
truly it allows it in a biological way
to expand the number of
operations that it can run,
and start thinking about, oh, well, okay.
Normally I'm kind of a loner
and I like to read and work
and you know, hang out
alone maybe and play alone
but you know okay,
I'll play a board game
or a game of tennis
where I have a partner and
we're going to play as partners
against two other people.
Okay, that's a little
uncomfortable, but I'll do it.
And in doing that,
you discover certain ways
in which you are
proficient in certain ways,
in which you are less proficient,
you discover that the other person
actually tends to cheat a little bit
or the other person is
extremely rigid about the rules,
or maybe it is extremely rigid
about the way they organize
their pieces on the board,
or they're crossing the line
into your side of the tennis court.
There are all sorts of
things that we learn
in these rather low stake scenarios.
That's the key theme here.
So before I continue,
I just want to point to a
tool that anyone can use,
but in particular, the
less playful of the group.
And I would put myself into this category.
Again, I'm not somebody who really engages
in spontaneous play.
I enjoy sports.
I enjoy exercise,
but that is distinct from play
because the sports and
exercise that I engage in,
I take pretty seriously.
They're not low stakes for me.
I put actually I put a
lot of importance on them.
Which is I'm saying all this,
I probably should put a
little less importance on them
and have a little more fun with those.
And yet what I'm about to tell you is that
anyone and everyone can
benefit from engaging
in a bit more of this playful mindset,
the playful mindset is not necessarily
about smiling and jumping
around or being silly.
That's not it at all.
It's not Tigger character
from "Winnie the Pooh" necessarily.
It could be,
but it's really about allowing yourself
to expand the number of outcomes
that you're willing to entertain
and to think about how you relate
to those different outcomes.
So what this means is putting yourself
into scenarios where
you might not be the top performer, right?
Playing a game that you're
not really that good at.
I had this experience recently,
friends that like to play cards,
they like to do some low stake gambling.
This is non illegal gambling ring.
They play for trivial things.
And I generally don't buy into the game.
I generally don't play
mostly because they end
up winning and taking
whatever it is that I have.
But in the mode of assuming
a more playful spirit,
the idea would be well,
if the stakes are low enough,
then to play simply for
the sake of playing,
because there's something to learn there
about the other people in the group
and about one's self
and how one reacts to things like
someone who's clearly trying
to take everybody's money
or somebody who is clearly trying to cheat
or somebody who's clearly very, very rigid
about every last detail,
including how the cards are
dealt and shuffled right?
There is learning in this exploration.
And that is at a biological
level, the prefrontal Cortex,
starting to entertain
different possibilities,
starting to entertain different outcomes
in this low stakes way.
And if you think about it,
that's not something
that we allow ourselves
to do very often.
Even if we listen to new forms of music
or we go see new art or new movies,
those are new experiences,
but that's not us making new predictions
about what's going to happen next.
It's not the brain working to figure out
new possibilities.
And so you can immediately see how
just a small increase in your willingness
to put yourself into conditions
where you don't understand
all the rules perhaps,
or you're not super
proficient at something,
but you enter it
because it is low stakes.
And because there is information to learn
about yourself and others
could start to open up these
prefrontal cortex circuits.
And when I say open up,
I don't mean that literally
there's an opening
in your skull.
What I mean is that your prefrontal cortex
can work in very rigid ways.
Meaning if A then B,
if I go down this street turn
left and go that way to work,
it is fast.
If I go down the other street, it's slow.
If there's a traffic jam there,
I'm going to go there
but it's starting to explore
different possibilities.
And there are very, very
few opportunities in life
to explore contingencies
in this low stakes way,
such that it engages neuroplasticity,
the prefrontal cortex.
So play is powerful
at making your prefrontal
cortex more plastic,
more able to change in
response to experience,
but not just during the period of play,
but in all scenarios,
because you get one prefrontal cortex,
you don't get a prefrontal
cortex just for play.
You get a prefrontal cortex
that engages in everything.
So going forward,
I will layer on some more
concrete aspects of tools,
but for now,
if you're somebody that
doesn't consider yourself,
particularly playful
consider,
and maybe even engage in
just a little bit of play
in some way,
that is of discomfort to you
with the understanding that is increasing
your prefrontal cortical plasticity.
Another really interesting
and important aspect of play
is so-called play postures.
These are seen in animals,
and these are seen in humans.
And for those of you that
are watching this podcast
on YouTube, I'll do my
best to adopt them here.
For those of you that are listening,
you'll just have to imagine
them in your mind's eye,
but Jaak Panksepp and
indeed Darwin himself,
study these play postures
that all animal engage in.
Perhaps the most familiar one
is seen in dogs and in wolves
where they will lower
their head to the ground
and they'll put their
paws out in front of them
and they will make eye contact
with another typically dog or wolf
to so-called call the play.
Now, when they do this posture,
it's obvious that they're
lowering themselves.
They're not in an aggressive stance,
because they're lowering their head.
And this is universally known
among canines as play posture.
There's some famous videos online.
You can look these up
of dogs actually doing this with bears
that they're confronted with
and the bears, at least in these videos
in exchange also lowering their head,
and there you see bear
dog playful interactions.
Now you always have to be
cautious with bears in general.
I would say you have to
be cautious with bears,
but this speaks to the
universality of this bowing,
this sort of the, the,
what some people call the puppy bow
or the play bow that dogs do
turns out that humans do this as well.
Although in a different form,
I'm sure there are some that go into the,
the down-dog play posture,
but more typically when
humans want to play,
they will do a subtle or
not so subtle head tilt.
The head tilt with eyes open
is considered the universal head
and facial expression
posture of play in humans.
So when two people see one another,
if they are aggressive
towards one another,
they will assume certain facial
expressions and postures.
But if they're feeling
playful towards one another,
oftentimes they'll tip
their head to the side
just a little bit and
they'll open their eyes.
They might even raise
their eyebrows briefly.
This has been seen again
and again and again.
Another hardwired feature
of so-called play postures
is what's called soft eyes.
When animals are aggressive,
or when they're sad,
they tend to reduce the
size of their eye openings
by basically making their
eyelids closer together,
somewhat,
by keeping their eyes together
in particular for aggression,
they'll bring their eyes towards
what we call a vergence eye movement.
Bring it towards the center
that actually narrows the
aperture of the visual field.
When people or animals
want to engage in play,
they tend to open their eyelids somewhat,
and they tend to purse their
lips just a little bit.
So it's not like stronger
pursing when your lips like this,
it's, pursing their lips.
They'll open their eyes a little bit.
And they'll often do
the head tilt as well.
Sometimes with a little bit of a smile.
These are reflexive
these are not trained up.
Children do this.
Adults do this dogs, wolves do this.
Even certain birds will do this.
Most birds have eyes on
the side of their heads,
but they do a sort of form
of this soft eyes approach.
And certainly in raptors,
you see a softening of the eyes
and indeed raptors like Hawks and Eagles
they actually do have
a certain form of play,
but only early in life.
The other thing that we see during play,
or what are called partial postures,
partial postures are a
kind of play enactment
of postures that would
otherwise be threatening.
So a partial posture that we
see during play in animals
and humans that relates
to aggressive play.
So things like wrestling
or things like rough and tumble play,
which is very common in animals
and kids and some adults.
Is that because there's going
to be physical interaction
in animals,
what will happen is
they will march toward one
another often very slowly,
but rather than having their hair up,
which is we call piloerection,
which is when the hair goes up,
animals do this to make
themselves look bigger.
Think of about the, the cat.
That's trying to look bigger or an animal
that's being aggressive,
trying to look bigger
in the presence of a foe,
a different animal that
they're either going to try
and kill or fight in some way,
even if it's to defend themselves,
partial postures occur
when animals will approach
one another,
but they'll keep their fur down.
Humans will do this to,
they will approach during play,
but unless it's highly competitive play
like a football game or a boxing match,
they will actually shrink
their body size somewhat.
We have hair on our bodies,
some of us more than others,
and that hair is capable of piloerection.
It can stand up.
That's the hair standing
up on end phenomenon,
but most of us don't have
enough hair on our bodies
that we can actually use that
to make ourselves larger.
So what you see with people
who are about to engage in play
is they tend to make their
body a little bit smaller
unless they are highly competitive
and highly competitive play
is its own distinct form of play.
That we'll talk about later,
such as during sport,
when the stakes are high,
a Super Bowl football game,
I'm revealing my ignorance
about sports here.
The Super Bowl as it's typically called
is a very high stakes game, right?
Salaries depend on it.
Sponsorships depend on it.
It's on television,
reputations depend on it.
So that's not really playing a game.
That's playing a very high stakes game
and there you're not going to
see these partial postures.
You're not going to see soft
eyes and tilting of the head.
At least not between the
opposing players on the team,
you're going to see quite the opposite.
Grunting, screaming, shouldering
people not blinking lowering their eyes,
or rather shrinking their eyes down to be,
to appear more aggressive.
These kinds of things
staring right through the other person,
you know verbal threats et cetera.
So that's not really play,
even though we say they're
playing a game of football,
it's very high stakes play.
What I'm referring to here
is when it's fairly low stakes.
And we see this again
in animals and human.
So there are many, many
of these partial postures.
Again, they happen spontaneously.
So if someone ever looks at you
and they tilt their head a little bit
and they raise their eyebrows
and they maybe smile a little bit,
they're looking at you playfully,
that's the universal human
exchange of, I want to play.
Do you want to play?
There's another play expression
that is considered the
most extreme of the come on
let's play express and postures.
And this is one that's
seen in a lot of primates
and indeed in some humans as well.
And that's the eyes wide open
and believe it or not tongue out,
it's the, that kind of silly thing.
That's I don't think that
I've ever done that before.
Just that kind of thing
is basically what primate
species of all kinds.
And indeed we are old
world primates as well,
do when they want to say,
I'm definitely here to play
and that's why I'm here.
Okay it's it has this kind
of silly look or connotation.
But if you watch chimpanzees
or you look at Bonobos,
or even in the so-called
new world monkeys,
which tend to be the smaller monkeys,
old world monkeys tend to
be the ones that in general,
see the world as we do,
they have what we call trichromacy.
They're the ones that often
can look very human-like.
The new world monkeys
tend to be the little ones
in general I'll give
you a little trick here.
Little tool based on primatology.
If you see a monkey and it's
making very slow movements,
or you see an ape of any kinds,
very likely to be an old world primate.
If you see a monkey
and it's, it can very quick movements
like it's doing this kind of thing,
like it's like a could
be a squirrel monkey
could be a marmoset,
likely to be a new world monkey.
And they don't see the world
that the same way we do,
they see the world more like a dog.
They don't really see reds.
They see reds as orange et cetera.
Okay that's not a hard and fast rule.
And I'm sure the primatologists
are going to come after me
with whatever primatologists
come after you
with monkey biscuits
or something like that.
But in general, it's a good rule.
If you're at the zoo and
you see a slow moving monkey
with slow deliberate gestures
kind of moves its eyes
makes eye contact every once in a while,
those tend to be the old world primates,
those kind of jittery ones
that look like they're really
nervous wrapping their tail
and kind of hiding there
in a little bundle.
Those tend to be the
new world monkeys, okay.
Again, not a black and
white type division,
but that'll get you most of the way.
So the whole purpose of
these partial postures
or the tongue out thing
is to limit power in deliberate ways
to really take bodily expressions
that could be portrayed or could be
interpreted as aggressive
or as threatening or as wanting to mate,
or as willing wanting to do
anything for that matter.
And to limit the power with
which they are expressed
in very deliberate way.
So that's the putting the hair down,
despite getting into a fighting stance.
That's saying let's fight,
but I'm not really here to fight fight.
It's low stakes fighting.
Like if I pin you,
then I'll let you go.
Or if you pin me, then
you ought let me go.
And so immediately you can start to see
how play starts to call into action,
social dynamics in which both parties
have to make some sort of agreement
about how high the stakes are.
Now, the failures to do this
are also very informative
in how we develop in social groups.
And this also can inform why some people
really play well with others
and other people don't.
And some people seem to
get along well with groups
and can handle other people.
And some people are very rigid.
In fact, I have an anecdote
about this when I was a kid,
we used to play this game.
It's not a game I suggest,
but we used to do what were
called "Dirt Clod Wars."
So a friend of mine,
his parents were generally
not home in the afternoon.
So we must have been somewhere
around 10 or 11 years old.
And we would set up these
two big dirt mounds.
We would shovel them to big
dirt mounds on two sides
of the yard.
And then we would just take dirt clods
and we throw them at one
another and just have
dirt clod wars.
Again, not suggesting this
I'm not responsible for what happens
if you do,
but there were rules
and the rules were, for instance,
you couldn't pack rocks
into the dirt clods
and you could run across to the other side
and you could jump on
the other person's mound
and you could throw dirt clods in there.
I guess, as the stuff that
we thought was entertaining.
But if someone got hit in the head,
generally there was an unspoken rule
that you kind of stop
and see whether or not they were damaged
or not before you'd continue,
you couldn't continue pelting them.
And of course, people broke this rule.
In fact I remember one kid
I'm not going to name him
because actually he's grown
into a very actually prominent
and functional adult,
but he got hit once in the head.
And then I think someone
had thrown a dirt clod
shortly thereafter,
and all of a sudden he
just went into a rage,
picking up rocks and sticks
and attacking another kid.
And so clearly that was a case in which
the rules of the game
were now being violated,
but it served a very important purpose.
There was, you know,
the typical thing that the,
there were some tears I think,
as I recall from one kid or the other,
there was like snot coming out of the nose
and turning bright red, a kid went home.
It was a mess.
The parents had to say something,
or maybe there was a phone call.
I don't quite recall how it got resolved.
But the idea is that
there's an agreed upon set of rules
about how high the stakes are
and what we're all going to do.
And this is separate from sport
where there are clearly defined rules
about what's out of bounds.
What's in-bounds.
What sorts of behaviors
will get you a yellow card
or a red card for instance
on the soccer field,
all animals including humans
are doing this low stakes
contingency testing
and all animals including
humans you'll find,
start to up the stakes.
And inevitably in group play,
one member of the group
will kind of break rules.
You see this also in puppies.
So for instance, puppies
will bite one another
with those sharp little
needle-like puppy teeth.
I remember when Costello had those teeth,
those things were so darn sharp
and puppies will yelp
when one of their littermates bites them,
that Yelp actually serves a very important
inhibitory function.
This is well defined
to tell the other one that's too tough,
and this is how animals learn soft bite.
Okay.
If they don't get that feedback
from other littermates,
they never actually learn.
What's too hard and what's soft.
And so humans do this as well.
Now you can look at your adult,
counterparts,
and indeed we should probably
look at ourselves and ask,
you know did we learn
proper play contingency
when we were younger?
Do we tend to take things too seriously?
Do we tend to overreact aggressively
when other people are clearly engaging in,
you know, playful, jabbing or sarcasm
or things of that sort.
So each of you will have a
different experience of this,
but the point is that play
serves many functions,
it's not just about the self.
It's also about interactions
between multiple people.
It's about rule testing
and low stakes contingency
rule breaking also
serves an important role
as is with the example
of the "Dirt Clod War"
puppies biting other puppies et cetera.
And last but not least,
there are different forms of play
that help us establish who
we will become as adults.
One of the more powerful of these
is role play when children
and sometimes adults
will take on different
roles that are distinct
from their natural world roles
in order to for instance,
establish hierarchies.
So someone's going to be the leader
and someone's going to be the follower.
Someone will be dominant.
Someone will be submissive.
Someone will work alone.
Other people will work in a group.
These kinds of role playing
are again ways in which
the prefrontal cortex
has to expand the number of operations
in neuroscience we call these algorithms
that it has to run in
order to make predictions.
You have to take in a lot of information
about your environment all the time
and make predictions.
But if you are suddenly
cast into a new role,
well then you definitely have to
make even more predictions
from a different standpoint.
So these are very powerful
for teaching the brain,
how to function.
I had a sister growing
up, I still have a sister,
fortunately,
and she and her friends
largely played with dolls
and doll houses in the room next door.
And they take on different roles.
In fact, some kids,
if they play alone
will start to take on the role of leader
by taking on an imaginary or
creating an imaginary friend.
And, you know, my apologies to my sibling,
but for a long time,
she had an imaginary friend
eventually that imaginary
friend disappeared.
I don't know the science
around imaginary friends
and what it makes them disappear or not
at what stage of development,
but imaginary friends are pretty common.
And that's just another
way of being able to,
you know boss somebody around,
if that's your thing,
or to do engage in cooperative play.
So we can look at this
stage of development,
we call childhood
and we can look at each stage
of it and we can say, wow,
there are all these
different dimensions of play
that really are about testing out
how we feel comfortable or uncomfortable,
how we react good or bad,
how we react with stress or with glee
when others behave in certain ways.
And so what I'm hoping is coming through
is that play is not just about having fun.
Play is about testing.
It's about experimenting
and it's about expanding
your brain's capacity.
And that's through early in development,
and it's through throughout the lifespan.
So at this point in the discussion,
I want to take a step back,
look at the biology and
neurochemistry of play
just a little bit.
And that really define
what is effective play.
If the goal of play is to
explore different contingencies
in low stakes environments
and to expand the function
of our prefrontal cortex
so that we can see new possibilities
and new ways of being become
more flexible, more creative,
more effective outside
of the games of play
or the arenas of play, I should say.
Well then we should be asking,
how do I know if I'm playing?
How do I know if I'm playing correctly?
Turns out there's an answer to that.
Earlier I referred to this brain area,
the periaqueductal gray
that releases opioids,
endogenous opioids into
our brain and body,
and tends to relax us a bit.
It actually is what leads to
these things like soft eyes
and head tilts and
puppies making, you know,
puppy postures and things of that sort,
and how that opens up the
number of different functions
or algorithms that the
prefrontal cortex can run,
but there's another piece of the puzzle,
which is for something to
genuinely be play and playful,
and for it to have this
effect of expanding our brain
and engaging neuroplasticity
of really changing our brain
so that we can see and engaging
more possible behaviors
and thoughts et cetera.
We also have to have low
amounts of adrenaline,
so called epinephrine
in our brain in body.
Now the background science
for this is quite extensive,
but for those of you that
are interested in papers
and manuscripts,
perhaps the best one is a review published
in Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews
by the very Jaak Panksepp
although he has a co-author,
which is Stephen Siviy,
S I V I Y
I'll provide a link to this
in the caption show notes.
And the title of this paper is;
"In Search of the
Neurobiological Substrates for
Social Playfulness in Mammalian Brains."
And it's a quite extensive review,
but it basically boils down
to some key findings
whereby, any sorts of drugs
or behaviors or scenarios
that increase levels
of adrenaline too much,
will tend to inhibit play
and drugs and scenarios
and I'm not suggesting
recreational drugs here,
but these were experiments that were done
in the laboratory setting
that increase the endogenous opioid output
will tend to increase playfulness.
And so really the state of mind
that one needs to adopt when playing is,
first of all you have to
engage in the play it,
whatever it happens to be
with some degree of focus
and seriousness
and focus and seriousness in
the neurobiological context
generally means epinephrine
being able to focus is largely reliant on
things like adrenaline epinephrine,
but also the presence of dopamine,
which is a molecule that
generates motivation
and focus in concert with epinephrine,
but also that these endogenous
opioids be liberated.
And it's really the low
stakes feature of play
that allows those endogenous
opioids to be liberated.
What do I mean by that?
Well, if you are very, very
concerned about the outcome,
like you've put a lot of money
on the table in a given game,
or you're a football
player in the Super Bowl,
or you're playing a game for which,
you know, defeating the other person
or your team winning is
absolutely crucial to you.
Well then that's not
really going to who engage
the play circuitry.
On the contrary,
if you are engaging in
those same behaviors
or any other behavior in a way
that you're simply there to explore,
but you don't have high levels
of adrenaline in your system,
you're not stressed about
the potential outcome.
Well, then that constitutes play.
Now that's somewhat
obvious on the one hand
that you take seriously
what you take seriously,
and you can be more playful about things
that you don't take so seriously,
but what is absolutely not obvious
is that the state of playfulness
is actually what allows
you to perform best
because the state of playfulness
offers you the opportunity to engage
in novel types of
behaviors and interactions
that you would not
otherwise be able to access
if you are so focused
on the outcome. Okay.
So a state of playfulness
is absolutely critical,
not just during play,
but during competitive
scenarios of any kind.
I actually started to cultivate
a practice related to this.
When I was in college,
I had this kind of general practice
of when I wanted to learn something.
I would tell myself that
it was the most important
information in the world
and that I was very very interested in it.
I would kind of lie to myself
and say oh, I'm super interested in,
I won't name the topics,
but super interested in this
or super interested in that.
And I could sort of delude
myself into being hyper focused
on whatever it is
that I was learning
in ways that surprised me.
However,
when we are hyper focused on something
and we are rigidly
attached to the outcome,
we can't engage in flexible thinking.
So it's a great tool to be
hyper-focused on something
and take it very, very seriously
when we're simply trying to learn things
by kind of rote memory,
learn things and regurgitate,
learn and regurgitate of the sort that,
you know, I'm frankly a
lot of schooling involves.
But if we are trying to
get better at something,
we sort of hit a wall
in athletic performance
or in cognitive performance,
where we're not creative enough,
where we're finding
let's just use a sports example
that, you know we only have
a certain number of moves
that we can deploy
or certain number of swings of the racket
that we can deploy.
The way to actually expand your practice
is to engage in this kind
of low stakes thinking,
the idea that, well, I'm just
going to kind of play and tinker.
I'm going to explore in a way
that it doesn't really matter
if the ball goes back over
the net,
doesn't really matter if
the ball goes in the hole
and it's counterintuitive
because you think,
no, the thing that we need
to do is drill and drill
and drill and drill.
And indeed there's a place for that.
But this mode of play with modest levels
of endogenous opioids being
released in our system,
plus low levels of adrenaline, right?
Epinephrine low levels of
epinephrine and adrenaline
are possible only when
the stakes are low enough
that we're not stressed.
Well that combination really
allows the prefrontal cortex
to explore different possibilities
in ways that can truly expand
our capabilities over time.
Now, this has been seen again and again,
also in the business sector,
some of the more challenging,
or I should say compare additive
companies to get jobs at
are very interested in hiring people
that as children were so called tinkerers,
and actually NASA was
first famous for this,
that many of the people
that achieved great success
in engineering at NASA,
when they looked back into
their childhood histories,
those people tended to be tinkerers.
They were people that would
kind of play with things
in way that wasn't about
rigidly following a recipe
or an instruction manual.
Great cooks discover new forms of food.
Indeed created entire genres of food
by way of being tinkerers.
Okay, musicians do this.
I grew up playing various sports,
but skateboarding was one that
I was particularly involved
in for a long time.
One of the greatest
skateboarders of all time
is some of you may recognize his name
as the Great Rodney Mullen.
And Rodney was kind of
famous for evolving the sport
and continuing to evolve the sport in ways
that no one could predict
using skateboards and all sorts of ways
that no one had thought of previously.
And of course there
are other skateboarders
that did that as well,
but he's particularly well known for that.
And his process is his own.
I can't speak to it too much,
but he was also known
as a kind of a tinker
as somebody who would spend a lot of time,
just kind of flipping the board
and just flipping it into the air
and watching the ways in which it flipped
and kind of studying
the physics of it really
and expanding on his
existing understanding
of what could happen on a skateboard
by way of just playing.
Now, he took it very seriously,
but it's this kind of razor's edge
between taking something very seriously,
but also tinkering and
playing and exploring
and just seeing what
happens and kind of like,
well, let's just see what
happens if we did this,
that mindset is extremely powerful
to export from this
thing that we call play
into what we could call
more serious endeavor
of one's occupation or sport,
whether or not it's behind a desk
or whether or not it's
running around on a field
really for or engineering, any endeavor.
And so the whole purpose
of this episode on play
is yes on the one hand
to illustrate the incredible
evolutionary utility of play
for setting up the self
and relation of the self to others,
indeed for setting up cultures entirely,
cuz' cultures will watch sport together
or they'll celebrate their team winning.
I mean, World Cup,
I've never been a big soccer fan,
even though my dad is
Argentine, but it's incredible.
I mean the entire world kind of lights up
and gets engaged around
whether or not their team,
their country is going
to win the Olympics also
being another example,
but play and sport are not quite the same
as I've pointed out before.
And for all of us who
are thinking about tools
and things that we can
extract from science
to enrich our lives,
I would say for those of
you that are already playing
on a regular basis
in one form or another
terrific start to expand
other forms of play
in particular forms of play
that involve new groups of individuals.
So if you're somebody that typically plays
one-on-one with somebody,
try to expand into playing as teams.
If you're somebody who only plays alone,
then try to expand into playing in perhaps
one-on-one first and in groups,
this is the way that your brain learns
and evolves and changes and gets better.
And I raised this because
another one of the top 10 questions I get
is how can I keep my brain young?
How can I continue to learn?
How can I get better in school
and sport in life and
relationships, et cetera,
emotionally, cognitively,
and on and on and on.
And yes,
there are supplements that
can support neuroplasticity.
Yes, there are brain games and apps
that can support neuroplasticity.
But if you really want to engage
neuroplasticity at any age,
what you need to do is
return to the same sorts
of practices and tools
that your nervous system naturally used
throughout development.
And it evolved over hundreds
of thousands of years
to trigger this thing that
we call neuroplasticity.
And the reason this is
so important is because
it starts to move us away from
what some people call hacks.
I define hacks as using one
thing for a different purpose
to kind of get a shortcut.
I don't really like the term, frankly,
and I don't like it
because it's not grounded
in any biological mechanism.
But when we look at play,
we can say, play is the portal to plastic.
Play at every stage of life
is the way in which we learned the rules
for that stage of life.
And play is the way in
which we were able to test
how we might function in
the real world context.
So play is powerful.
And we could even say that play
is the most powerful portal
to plasticity.
The reason for that is that
yes, this high opioid, low
epinephrine or adrenaline state
is what opens up play.
But then inside of the arena of play,
when the prefrontal cortex is running
all these different possibilities
in this low stakes way.
But with some degree of focus,
there are a number of other
chemicals that are deployed.
Things like Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor
and other growth factors that actually
trigger the rewiring of brain circuits
that allow for it to expand.
And indeed that's what is neuroplasticity.
If you're interested in those chemicals
and kind of arena of things that happen
when one engages in neuroplasticity,
there's a vast literature out there.
But one of the more popular books
that I think is quite good
is from my friend and
colleague, John Ratey,
who's a psychiatrist at
Harvard Medical School.
That's R A T E Y.
He wrote the book "Spark"
a few years back,
and I think it's still very relevant.
And John talks about
the important role that play
exerts in the neuroplasticity process
and points to a number
of different protocols
that one can engage in.
He also points to the
importance of navigating
new environments
to not just go on the
same hike every week,
or take the same walk,
but actually get into
new novel environments.
So you're starting to sense a theme here.
There's novelty,
exploring contingencies,
keeping the stakes relatively low,
et cetera, et cetera.
But these really are the gates
to this holy grail that
we call neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity as I've talked
about in the podcast before
is a two step process.
It involves focusing very intensely
or at least focusing
somewhat on whatever it is
that one is trying to learn,
and then engaging in deep rest,
ideally deep sleep in
the following nights.
And I've also talked about
the benefits of things
like naps and Yoga Nidra so-called NSDR,
Non Sleep Deep Rest
for enhancing or accelerating plasticity.
You can check out the episodes
on Focus at hubermanlab.com
or the episodes on How to Learn Faster.
The detail all of those.
We had a newsletter that lists out
all the tools for neuroplasticity
enhancing neuroplasticity,
all that is available.
Zero cost to you at
hubermalab.com, et cetera.
You can just download that information,
but John's book that
newsletter those episodes.
They really point to this two step process
where it's focus and then rest
focus and then rest
and play is its own unique form
of focus and then rest, focus and rest.
It's not the same as learning
something for sake of school
or critically trying to
learn a motor behavior
for sake of sport.
It's really about expanding
the number of things
that you could learn down the line.
Okay, so said once again.
So I just want to make
sure it's abundantly clear
play is about establishing
a broader framework
within which you can learn new things.
It's not about learning
some specific thing.
It's not about the game
you happen to be playing.
It's not about the dollhouse
that the kids are playing with
so that they can become
amazing dollhouse players
when they grow up. Right.
The dirt Clod war that
I referred to earlier
for better or for worse
was not about becoming
the best dirt clod thrower
or winning the trophy for dirt clods
in the neighborhood.
Although we actually had a trophy
for the best dirt clod team.
Alas, it was not my team that year.
But the point is that
you're learning rules
and establishing a broader
foundation of practices
that then can learn more
things within that context.
Thus far I've tried to convince you
through a combination of data
and anecdote and explanation
that adopting a stance of playfulness
and indeed engaging in play
on a somewhat regular basis
could be beneficial to you
regardless of circumstances or goals.
If I haven't done that already,
what I'm about to tell you,
hopefully will push you over the line.
It turns out that when you
look across the kingdom
of all animals,
what you find is that animals
that engage in playful behaviors
for the longest period of time
are also the animals that
have the greatest degree
of neuroplasticity,
the brain and nervous system's ability
to change in response to experience,
put differently,
animals that only play
for a very small fraction
of their entire life
have very rigid brains that
don't learn new things,
whereas animals that
play for a long period
throughout their life
have very plastic brains.
And there's even some
evidence that's at this point,
largely anecdotal,
but there's some data starting to emerge
that adults that maintain a playful stance
that engage in things again
that are low stakes contingency exploring
important enough that people focus
and that people pay attention
to what they're doing,
but that they are not, you know,
filled with adrenaline, you know,
freaked out about the
outcome being A or B,
they're not super, super competitive,
maybe just a little bit competitive
or not competitive at all.
That allows for more ongoing plasticity.
And one of the people that comes to mind
in thinking about this is
of course the Physicist,
and I should say the Great
Physicist, Richard Feynman,
Nobel Prize Winner Professor at Caltech
was involved in the Manhattan Project,
but was also known for being
a lifelong tinker, right?
He also is a mischievous tinker.
If you read any of the books
about Feynman or by Feynman
"Surely You're Joking."
Mr. Feynman, or "What Do You
Care What Other People Think?"
these are wonderful short stories,
mostly about Feynman,
doing things like
picking all the locks at
the Los Alamos Laboratory
and putting all the top secret documents
out on the floor of the office
so that when people
came men in the morning,
they were all out there.
Obviously they weren't
released to the general public.
He didn't want to threaten
national security,
but playing pranks like that.
And actually Caltech,
I don't know if this is still the case,
but Caltech where he was employed
was always known for doing very
technologically challenging pranks.
They're not known for their
athletic pros at Caltech,
sorry, Caltech,
but they were known for example,
disrupting the scoreboard at
the Rose Bowl in Pasadena,
for instance,
and things of that sort
through technological
feats, at least at the time
required a lot of playfulness
and technological pros.
So if you look in science
or you look in art,
or you look in medicine
or you in any domain,
what you find is the people
that continue to evolve
new practices
tend to be people that were tinkerers.
People that are very creative,
tend to be people that are unafraid
of exploring things in
a, this low stakes way.
They're not so rigidly
attached to the outcome
that they have to do everything
perfectly all the time.
Now they might cloak
these playful behaviors
so that their final works
always look perfect or
always look incredible,
but they have this kind of
playful nature about them.
I would venture even say that the,
the street artist Banksy, for instance,
obviously an incredible
artist puts a ton of thought
and preparation into their work,
but there's a kind of playfulness
to the whole thing too,
of using two dimensional paintings
in concert with three
dimensional city dwellings
in ways that,
you know I think that most
people hadn't previously,
there were other people
like Christo and, you know,
artists of that sort that did that.
But I think Banksy is kind of recognized
as the modern, the modern rendition
of that kind of playfulness
using cities in ways
that most people don't use cities
using art in ways that
most people don't use art,
for instance.
So to go back to the example of Feynman.
Feynman was somebody who learned to paint
and draw quite well into his sixties.
He was somewhat famous or infamous,
I should say for Bongo Drumming
on the roof of Caltech.
I say infamous because
he was known also for doing that naked.
Something that certainly not in concert
with the ethical standards and behaviors
of universities today.
But Feynman had this
playful spirit as a child.
He had that playful spirit as a teenager,
and he had that playful
spirit as an adult.
And that's one of the
whole hallmarks of Feynman
was that he wasn't just a rigid physicist
who could explain things
clearly to the general public.
He always carried through
this playful spirit
and in some of his writings,
he pointed to the fact
that that playful spirit
was something that he worked very hard
to continue to cultivate in himself
because it was the way
in which he could see
the world differently
and to indeed make great discoveries
in the field of physics,
but also to kind of
evolve his relationship
to life more generally.
And so he comes to mind
as a prominent example
of somebody who did this.
And if I could achieve
anything with this episode,
besides teaching you something
about the biology of play,
it would be to teach you
about the utility of play.
Again, I'm,
don't consider myself a
particularly playful person
by nature,
but I've tried over the years to adopt
this stance of exploring
things that are, you know,
very focused on contingencies
of different kinds,
but keep the stakes low enough
that I can have some fun doing them.
And I like to think that
it's benefited me somewhat.
Now, I'd like to drill
a little bit further
into this thing that we
called neuroplasticity.
Again neuroplasticity is the
brain and nervous system's
ability to change in
response to experience.
And I should just say that
throughout the entire lifespan,
the nervous system can change very quickly
in response to negative experiences.
We can almost all engage in
what's called one trial learning
where if something really
terrible or traumatic happens
to us,
our nervous system will
rewire almost immediately,
at least within a few days,
such that we tend to want
to avoid the experience
that led to that trauma.
Now the whole business of
why people return to things
that are traumatic to them
is a whole other issue.
There are books about
things like trauma bonding.
There's the so-called
repetition compulsion
from psychoanalysis
that people go back into trauma to retest
and gain new opportunities
to overcome the trauma,
et cetera, et cetera.
But in general, what I'm
referring to here is,
you know,
you have a bad experience
at the swimming pool
when you're a kid
where someone holds your
head underwater too long,
and then you just don't want
to get back in the water.
That's one trial learning of sorts,
that of course can be overcomed
through proper exposure therapy
or someone that you
trust taking you there,
or any number of behaviors
that allow you to overcome that,
be that particular scenario
and experience something new
in that same context.
But across the lifespan,
the learn earning of new
things, new contingencies,
new possibilities
occurs very differently
from about age zero when we're born
until about age 25 and thereafter.
So from about, about,
I want to emphasize
approximately age 25 onward
neuroplasticity occurs through the process
that is exactly as I
described before, focus, rest,
focus, rest, we focus very intensely.
We can't do the thing.
We can't do the new movement.
We can't do the golf swing.
We can't learn the math.
We try, we try, we try, we
try, we sleep a few nights.
And then all of a sudden
we can do it, right,
because the rewiring actually
occurs during deep rest
or naps,
but mostly during deep sleep.
From birth till about out age 25 however,
we can learn things, new things,
and new contingencies,
not just negative things
and traumatic things
through somewhat passive
exposure to those things, right.
I will never forget the first time
that we went on a family
trip to Washington DC.
And we went to the Smithsonian.
I got to see the, the old fighter planes.
And I think,
I think the Kitty Hawk
or the first one of the
first planes was there.
Anyway, I obviously my
recollection isn't terrific.
My hippocampus is, is
flailing on that one,
but I'll never forget the trip.
And I'll never forget who went.
And I think I was probably
eight or nine years old.
It's embedded somewhere in my memory.
And so just through passive experience
and my focusing on the
things that excited me
about that trip,
I have a recollection of that experience.
I didn't have to deliberately focus.
I didn't, wasn't telling myself focused,
you're going to need to
remember this trip someday
and you're going to be
podcasting about this,
you know, in 39 years, or whenever
again, I forget exactly how old I was.
But the key feature here is that
the developing brain is able
to learn through passive experience
because the neurons, the nerve
cells in the developing brain
are much more over-connected
than they will be later in life.
The way to think about this is sort of,
if you use Google maps,
as I do too often I think
when I drive,
there are a number of roads and pathways
that would get you from
point A to point B.
We could imagine those as neural circuits,
or we could imagine neural
circuits as those roads.
Early in development,
the nerve connections
are much more extensive.
It it's like having a Google maps
that where everything is
connected to everything
through tiny little cross streets.
And the whole thing is
just a complete mess.
But then by taking particular routes
of behavior of thought of emotion,
certain routes become well established.
And the other routes that are not taken
simply disappear.
Now in the biological
context in the brain,
we call that process pruning.
And the simple way to envision
this is early in development.
You have many, many more
neurons than you will have
as an adult.
Those neurons are
extensively interconnected,
and approximately 40% of
those interconnections
will disappear by the
time you're 25 years old,
they are gone.
They are actively
removed through processes
that involve things like
glial cells that come in
and literally sneak their little processes
in between neurons at the synapse,
which are the points of
contact and communication
between neurons and push those apart,
even eat neurons, right?
There's some incredible
work from for instance,
Beth Stevens' Lab at
Harvard Medical School,
showing that glial cells
go in and eat synapses
that are not functional for
that particular circuit.
Now, what this tells us is
that much of our learning
during development is the
removal of incorrect connections,
but it also involves the
strengthening of connections
that are going to serve certain
emotions, certain functions,
motor functions, cognitive
functions, et cetera.
The process of play
is largely a process of engaging pruning
of neural connections
and strengthening of the
remaining connections.
I'm sure that many of
you have heard the term
fire together wire together.
That phrase is often
incorrectly attributed
to the great Donald Hebb,
who indeed was great.
Did incredible work a
psychologist from Canada
who established a lot of the
basic cellar learning rules
for learning and memory,
but it was the also great Dr. Carla Shatz,
who is now at Stanford
and was at Berkeley and Harvard as well,
but who is at Stanford Medical School
who coined this term fire
together wire together.
Indeed that's what happens
when children play
when adolescents play
and when young adults play,
whether or not it's social play
or play with an object,
whether or not it's a
sport or a play of any kind
imaginary play imaginary friend play,
there is a strengthening of
certain neural connections
and a pruning away of up to 40%,
perhaps even more of connections
that are not necessary for
certain types of behaviors,
emotions, and thoughts.
And what this means is
that it is through the process of play,
that we become who we are as adults.
And as I mentioned earlier,
it is through the process of play
that we are able to adjust
who we are as adults.
Now, there are bounds on this process,
as far as I know there's
never been a reported case
of an individual who had a hyperplastic
or I should say a brain that
was as plastic in adulthood
as it was in childhood.
But what this tells us is that
what we do in the process
of play as children
is really how we set up the rules
for how we behave as adults
in almost all domains,
which is really incredible.
And of course the reassuring thing is that
playing as an adult
will allow you to expand
on those neural circuits.
You can literally grow new connections.
Some of you may be saying,
does it create new neurons
for better or for worse?
It does not seem that
many new neurons are added
to your brain in adulthood.
There are some papers
that report a few neurons
in certain brain areas,
isolated brain areas,
but by and large,
most of the rewiring of neural connections
is the removal of certain connections.
This process we're calling Pruning
and the strengthening of
the remaining connections
that make those kind of Google maps roads.
And the analogy I laid out before
thicker and more robust think about as
taking little trails
and turning them into roads,
then paving those roads.
Then turning those roads into highways,
then putting up more
lanes on those highways
and eliminating all the small
little back-country roads
that one could take.
And again,
this is an analogy for what is happening
at the level of neuro circuitry.
Now,
one of the key findings that
has emerged from the literature
is children that have
been subjected to trauma
or immense amounts of stress of any kind,
have a harder time both engaging in play,
but also a harder time
accessing neuroplasticity later
in life.
The good news is this is
not a permanent effect.
And we'll talk about some
of the ways to overcome that
in a moment,
but this should make sense to you
because earlier we talked about
how a high level of adrenaline
epinephrine in the brain and body
actually inhibits blocks the circuits
in the brain and body that
generate play behavior.
And when I say that,
I mean that in a very concrete way,
that epinephrine and adrenaline
can actually suppress
the sorts of circuitry
that can lead to things like soft eyes
or tongue out, or the head tilt,
or what we called partial postures
of being able to engage in,
you know, a rough and tumble play,
but not take that to the
point of outright aggression
and damaging the other
person or them damaging you.
So when I say that,
you know, trauma and stress
can inhibit neuroplasticity
by way of inhibiting play
at a deeper neuro biological level.
What I'm really saying is
that the high levels of adrenaline
that are generated from
trauma and stress actually
shut down the circuits
that allow a child or a young adult
to enter the game of play
or in the game of play
in the same way that
a child or young adult
who didn't have high levels of adrenaline
in their system could possibly engage in.
Now,
the good news is that many of
the existing trauma therapies
that are out there now,
including things like EMDR
Exposure Therapy, Cognitive
Behavioral therapy,
and on and on,
including some of the therapies
that are more neurochemical,
things like ketamine, or
are more engineering based,
things like Transcranial magnetic
stimulation for instance,
many of those are paired
with forms of talk therapy
that are really about the
same thing that play is about,
which is exploring
different contingencies.
It's about exploring different types
of emotional experiences
as they relate to the
same sort of scenario
that created the trauma.
And we did an entire
episode on fear and trauma,
and I recommend you
check out that episode.
It's easy to find again
at hubermanlab.com,
it's on YouTube, Apples,
Spotify, et cetera, et cetera,
very easy to find.
And there I talk all
about trauma treatments
and the various kinds of trauma treatments
that are out there,
their efficacy in different
scenarios and traumas and so on.
But the point I'd like to make now is that
the reason why children who
experience a lot of trauma
and stress have limited
plasticity later on
is because the neurochemical substrates
that are created from trauma and stress,
because after all
stress is epinephrine and
epinephrine is stress.
Those are inseparable
and the way in which it
more or less shuts down
or at least inhibits suppresses
those play circuits.
And again the reassuring thing
is that by engaging in play as adults,
we can reactivate some of those circuits
and reopen the plasticity.
In fact one very prominent
trauma treatment now,
especially for people
that have been subjected
to very severe traumas,
in the ongoing sense,
meaning traumas that went
on for many, many years
is to get them to engage in play
in things like dance
in basically getting them to engage
their bodily movements
in ways that they would otherwise
not feel comfortable to engage in.
And I find this area so interesting
because on the face of it, you could say,
oh, that's kind of, you know,
is that really biomedical treatment?
You know, you're taking
people who traumatized
and having them dance.
I mean, it seems kind of
silly on the one hand,
depending on your, you know,
your particular orientation.
But on the other hand,
it's actually quite
profound and quite grounded
in the mechanisms by which
the brain circuits change.
So again,
back to this original principle,
which is that play, isn't
just one portal to plasticity
play is the fundamental
portal to plasticity
and that play and dance
and exploration of novel movements,
exploration of novel athletic movements
are the route
by which we access new ways of thinking
new contingencies.
And I find it wonderful
that the trauma release
and the psychiatric and
psychology community
are exploring things like play and dance
and other forms of
reopening these circuits
because indeed we would all love
for there to be a magic pill
by which trauma could be erased
and new memories could be laid down
or a device that could do that.
But frankly, if you ask me
or a number of my colleagues,
whether or not that's likely
to happen anytime soon
in an effective way,
I think the short answer
is going to be no,
that there are going to be chemicals
and things that can augment
and support that process,
but that there's not going
to be just a magic pill
that will suddenly
reverse trauma altogether.
That it's always going
to be a case whereby
shifts in neurochemical states
are going to have to be combined
with new ways of thinking
and new behaviors.
And I find it wonderful in reassuring
that people are looking
at play and play behavior
as a not just one tiny
shard of possibility there,
but that it might actually
be the main driver
and a highly productive lever
by which to rewire the traumatized brain.
So if you're like me,
you might be thinking,
okay, I'm willing to be more playful.
I'm willing to explore,
play as a portal to plasticity.
And that all makes good sense,
but what should I play?
What should I do?
Well, we've already established
that you want to keep
your adrenaline low.
You have to keep the stakes slow enough
that you're not going to get
totally consumed by the outcome.
Now, for some people who
are highly competitive,
that's going to be challenging.
And yet I don't want to make it seem
as if you can't be
competitive during play.
There are many forms of competitive play
that because you are a competitive person,
allow you to drive great joy
from that competitive play.
I have a friend who's
particularly good at horseshoes.
I'm not particularly good at horseshoes,
but whenever we play horseshoes,
I can tell he's out there
to crush me on horseshoes.
And it's just one of these
things where, you know,
I can tell he derives great pleasure
from crushing me at a game of horseshoes.
I can't say because I
haven't actually done
the microdialysis,
which is a way of extracting chemistry
from the brain in real time,
nor have I recorded from his
brain or image it in a scanner,
whether or not he has
high levels of epinephrine
or low levels of epinephrine.
During those games of horseshoes,
I suspect his low levels of epinephrine
and high levels of dopamine,
especially when he wins.
And he has, he wins every time.
But the win is that you can
be competitive during play,
provided that you were enjoying yourself.
Okay, you can be competitive
There are particular forms of play
that lend themselves
best to neuroplasticity.
And those particular forms of play again,
are not designed to
necessarily just engage
the plasticity that allows
you to perform that behavior,
but rather to expand the
number of possibilities
for your brain to change
in general throughout life
and the two major forms of those
for which there's good
Peer Reviewed Research
is to engage in novel forms of movement,
including different speeds of movement.
So let's say for instance,
you're somebody who runs.
I happen to like running.
I try and run three times a week.
And generally when I run, I run forward,
I don't run backward, although recently,
because I've become very excited
about the work of so-called
"Knees Over Toes Guy,"
his name is Ben Parker,
but he goes by "Knees Over
Toes Guy" on Instagram.
I've never met him,
but we've exchanged a few
messages back and forth.
And some of his practices involve
walking backwards or doing
sled poles backwards.
I found these to be very beneficial
for my back and for my,
you know, interior tibialis
and some things that have really helped
with my posture and so forth.
But in general, when I run, I run forward,
I don't tend to run backward that much.
And I might do that for
a few minutes at the end,
but not so much throughout the entire run.
Running doesn't lend itself
to a lot of novel forms
of movement, lateral movements.
So for the nerds out there
movement in the Sagittal plane
or angled movements,
but it does appear that
things like dance or sports
where you end up generating
a lot of dynamic movements
where there's jumping,
where there's movement
at different angles,
where there's ducking,
where there's leaping,
that basically involve a
lot of dynamic movement.
And aren't just strictly linear.
Those seem to open the
portals for plasticity.
And that's because they mimic
a lot of the brain circuitry
that is associated with play.
And the reason for that
is the way in which
those dynamic movements
and movements of different speeds
engage the vestibular system.
The balance system,
the vestibular system is in the inner ear,
relates to the cerebellum,
which translates the mini brain.
You got a little mini brain
in the back of your brain.
It brings together visual
information in a very direct way.
I talked a lot about this in the episode
on how to learn faster.
So if you want to go in
depth on how vestibular
and different types of motor
movements can open plasticity,
I talk a little bit more, I
should say a lot more there,
but suffice to say that engaging in play
that has a lot of dynamic movement
or movements of different speeds,
things like dance,
things like sports,
like soccer where you're
moving in different dimensions.
That tends to be very conducive
to what we would call
play related circuitry
provided you don't take it too seriously.
You don't get those high
levels of epinephrine.
Now for those of you that
are also interested in non-physical
or non-athletic forms of play
that can really expand plasticity.
There's some very interesting research
about the game of Chess.
I don't play the game of Chess.
I've played a few times.
I confess I don't know how
to move all the pieces.
So I'm not going to try
and describe that here,
but I've always wanted to learn Chess.
And I think after reading some
of the Peer Reviewed Research
about chess and play and neuroplasticity,
now I understand why
there's a really nice paper
published in the International
Journal of Research
in Education and Science in 2017.
And the title of this paper is,
"Is Chess Just a Game or Is It a Mirror
That Reflects a Child's Inner World?"
That's a very, a very intense title
for a biologist like me,
but this paper is so interesting
because what it really points to is
the fact that in a single game chess,
you have at least as I
understand two players,
and those two players are moving
pieces on the chess board,
for which each piece can
do different things, right?
Can move in different ways
under different scenarios,
but they're different
rules for different pieces.
And so each player actually has to assume
multiple identities during the same game.
And each of those identities
has different rules
and ways of interacting.
So in a way we can think
of chess as one game,
but actually chess is
a kind of a substrate
for exploring multiple roles
for different characters.
And this is quite a bit different
than for instance, video games
where somebody has their
favorite video game player,
or they have an avatar.
And they're always in the same role.
It's also quite a bit different
for when you engage in any kind of play
where you are yourself,
you're just being you in that game.
And so now I'm highly
incentivized to explore chess.
You see quotes out there, for instance,
things like "Chess is life
or jiu jitsu is life."
I always assumed that that
meant that someone's entire life
was chess
or their entire life was
jiu jitsu for instance,
but in reading over the research
about chess in particular,
but at also certain forms of martial arts,
also certain forms of dance.
What one finds is that
indeed those games are life
in the sense that they involve
adopting multiple roles
and exploring contingencies
in a number of different ways.
So there are some games
that allow you to explore
a much vaster landscape
of movements or of mental roles
or of ways of engaging
in strategic movement
as is the case with chess.
And so when you hear that,
you know, activity blank is life.
It often reflects the
passion for that activity,
but I think looked at differently.
It also reflects the
fact that that activity
is a portal through which
you can explore life
through many, many different lenses.
And I think that that's
especially powerful
in terms of thinking about how play
can be leveraged for plasticity.
So for those of you that are
interested in leveraging play
for neuroplasticity and
expanding your mind,
if you will,
I highly recommend picking an activity
that will allow you to
adopt different roles
within that activity
where it's not rigidly linear.
This is actually a way in which
I start to depart from
this modern and important,
but somewhat narrow idea.
That exercise is the
only route to plasticity.
Yes, it's true.
I have Nobel Prize winning colleagues
that swim for two miles a day
and have done on that for a long time.
And they will tell you,
I always think more
clearly after my swimming
and I certainly in my
experience after a good run
or a good workout, my
mind seems to work best.
Unless of course, that workout
was very, very intense.
I've talked about this before.
If you do work out very, very hard
in whether or not it's aerobic
or resistance training
or sport of any kind,
you brain won't function
as well afterwards,
mostly because of the diversion of oxygen
to tissues away from your brain,
you actually are getting
less oxygen to your brain,
but in general,
most of us feel that if
we exercise regularly,
our brain functions better.
But there are activities that
extend beyond linear exercise,
beyond just generating
the same sets of movements
over and over again,
when or not it's exercise or not.
And that's really what play is.
Play is about dynamically
exploring different kinds
of movements,
dynamically exploring
different kinds of thoughts,
different kinds of roles
that one could adopt.
And that is the way that
the brain learns new things.
So I encourage you to explore chess.
I intend to learn chess this year.
I'm very excited to do that.
Now, if you already play chess
and you are an expert chess player,
you actually will derive less benefit
in terms of this play
induced neuroplasticity
than you would, for instance,
if you went out,
and I don't know, played a game of soccer
or did something that was very novel
for your nervous system,
because in that novelty
and in that exploration of new behaviors
and new ways of thinking,
you are opening the portal to plasticity,
whereas in doing what you
already know how to do
and trying just to perform
better and better at it,
you will get better at chess,
but again, that's just chess.
You are not expanding the realms
in which you can become more plastic,
that you are able to learn new things
in relationship,
in life, in finance and
friendship, et cetera.
In researching this episode,
one of the most interesting
areas I discovered
was this notion of personal play identity,
personal play identity is a term
that at least to my
knowledge was coined by
a Turkish researcher by the name.
And forgive me, I'm going
to mispronounce this
is Gkhan Gne
G O K H A N,
last name G U N E S.
And forgive me Gkhan
and if we have any Turkish
speaking members of the audience,
please put the correction in
the comment section on YouTube,
make it fanatic so I can
understand what it is.
Please I'd love to
correct it and apologies,
or who knows if I got it right
then it was pure luck.
Gkhan Gne has coined this
term personal play identity,
and the key role that
personal play identity
establishes in who we
see ourselves as being,
and not just in the context of play.
Personal play identity
has four well defined dimensions.
And I should say that if you're interested
in learning more about this,
the paper that I found
particularly informative
is published in Current Psychology
and the title is "Personal play identity
and the fundamental elements
in its development process."
And the author of course,
is Gkhan Gne G U N E S last name.
This is from 2021.
So recent review.
There are four components
to personal play identity,
how you play,
your personality,
socio culture and environment.
So that's the third one that's together,
socio culture environment,
and economics and technology.
Now that sounds somewhat complex,
and this paper is somewhat complex,
but basically what it says is that
we bring together certain
aspects of ourselves
and how we react to
different place scenarios
when we're younger.
And we bring that forward into the world.
In all context as adults.
To illustrate this,
I'm going to ask you a question,
when you were a child,
let's say 10 years old,
would you have considered
yourself competitive?
Would you have considered yourself
somebody who's cooperative?
And realize of course
that those are not mutually exclusive,
you could be competitive and cooperative.
Would you consider yourself somebody
that preferred to play alone
or preferred to play with
one or two close friends?
Or were you somebody that
really enjoyed playing
in large groups?
Here's a key one.
Were you somebody that enjoyed
playing the leader in one moment
and was equally okay
with being a follower at a later moment?
Were you okay with
having your role switched
midway through a game?
Were you get up upset or be delighted
or not care at all about
having to switch teams
during the middle of game
because your team was winning right?
To even things out,
you can imagine how that
would play out internally.
You would immediately register
that you must be a valuable player
because you're being
moved off the winning team
toward the losing team.
But then again,
you're now being forced
to join the losing team.
How did you feel about that?
Were you somebody that was comfortable
with other people breaking rules
or perhaps even yourself breaking rules
or bending rules,
kind of be able to find term,
or were you somebody that
really needed to know all the rules?
And if everyone didn't
rigidly adhere to those rules
was quite disturbed by that?
The number of questions
goes on and on and on.
And I will provide a link to a paper
that asks a number of questions
that helps you arrive at
a sort of score of sorts
or an index of what Gne
and others have referred
to as personal play identity.
The point is that
if we look back to our early adolescence,
somewhere between 10 and 14 years old,
a peak time for social development,
a peak time for play of various kinds,
a peak time for motor development,
a peak time of psychosocial development,
where we learn where we
fit into hierarchies.
As we relate to members of the same sex
of the opposite sex, et cetera,
we can start to get a portal into
how and why we show up to
various activities in work
and relationship, et cetera, as adults.
In fact,
I'll venture to say that
if we go into that process
for ourselves for five or 10 minutes,
you start to see some remarkable parallels
between the way you were at that stage
and your tendencies and
your preferences as adults.
We tend to look at our
early childhood experiences
and our families,
and to some degree our friends
in terms of how we become who we become.
I've talked about the
incredible work of Allan Schore
on previous episodes of the podcast.
Allan Schore is a psychiatrist
and has done extensive work
on how parent child
interactions in particular baby
and mother,
but also baby and father
shaped the brain
and the brain and
emotional system's ability
to go from states of
elation and excitement,
the so-called dopamine
epinephrine type circuitry
to the more warm soothing
types of calm interactions
that in broad terms could be described
as more serotonin oxytocin
and things of that sort.
That work really points to the key roles
that the caregiver
and the child you
engaged in an early life.
And that is incredible work.
I do hope to host Dr.
Schore on the podcast
at some point in the
not too distant future,
but equally important of course,
are the interactions that we export
from that early laying down
of biological circuitry
and psychological circuitry,
to the way we play by ourselves
and the way we play with others
in small numbers or in great numbers.
And of course it would be the case
that how we played as a 10 or 12 year old
would impact how we
behave as a 16 year old
and as a 20 year old and as a 30 year old
and so on and so on.
One of my favorite things
about developmental biology
and developmental psychology
is that it is grounded in the fact
that we don't just have a
childhood and an adulthood.
There isn't just our child
self and our adult self.
And even though there
are transitions around
the mechanisms that
underline neuroplasticity
at approximately age 25,
it is simply the case that development
is our entire lifespan,
that our lifespan is one
long developmental arc.
How long depends on our
genetics, our lifestyle
accidents, injury and disease of course,
but it is one long developmental arc.
And so it shouldn't surprise us at all
that how we learn to play as
a 10 year old or 12 year old
would impact how we play
and interact with people
as a teenager and a young adult
and on and on and on.
And that play is the
place in which we explore
in which we learn
play is the substrate
by which our nervous system changes us
from this hyper-connected
batch of neurons,
where everything is
connected to everything,
more or less
to a brain and nervous system whereby
certain circuits work
with immense proficiency
and others are less accessible to us.
But again,
the wonderful thing about
the human nervous system
is that because it is plastic
for the entire lifespan
and because these two
elements of focus and rest
can be deployed again
and again, and again,
just because neural circuits didn't form
does not mean that they
can't form later in life.
And today we've been
focusing on how play itself,
the same substrate that
we use during development
to become who we are,
is the portal by which
we can change who we are
for the better.
So I hope I've convinced you
that play is an extremely important
fundamental homeostatically regulated
aspect of our nervous system,
which is just a mouthful
of nerd speak to say,
play can change your brain for the better.
And that is true for every stage of life.
The recommendation that I make,
and certainly the one that
I'm going to direct it myself
as well
is to try and engage in at least one hour
of pure play per week.
Now I came to that recommendation
because of the literature that says,
well, you need to engage
something pretty repetitively.
It should be novel.
So this wouldn't be something
that you are exceptionally
good at already.
If you insist on doing something
that you're already exceptionally good at,
then you want to really do some free form,
low stakes tinkering.
So make it safe,
but make it free form.
So really explore things with that.
Some people call this beginner's mind.
Although I find that a little abstract,
I like the notion of beginner's mind,
but sort of like,
how do you know if you're
in beginner's mind?
I think beginner's mind
is sort of the expectation
that you're not going to do it well yet,
but play extends beyond beginner's mind.
Play is really about
not even worrying if you're
going to get good at it
or really proficient at it.
It's really about exploring contingencies
with truly low stakes.
That's what will allow you to access
these neurochemical combinations
of elevated endogenous opioids,
low epinephrine, et cetera,
that will open up neuroplasticity.
For those of you that need
a little more guidance
on how to play.
There's a book out there
actually learned about this
from Tim Ferriss' blog,
it's called "Play It Away: A
Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety."
So that's more focused on anxiety.
The author is Charlie Hoehn,
last name H O E H N
will provide a link for it in
the show notes and caption,
"Play It Away: A Workaholic's
Cure for Anxiety."
But books and other resources aside,
I think one hour of play per week
is a reasonable amount of time
to engage in dedicated play behavior.
For the purpose of opening
up these neural circuits
for plasticity,
the key feature of course,
is to not have immense proficiency
in that given activity,
or at least not the way you perform it.
And if you do gain
proficiency in that activity,
well, then it becomes something else
it's no longer about
play it's performance.
So in that case,
you would then want to
adopt a new play behavior.
You'll notice that I largely avoided
using the word fun
throughout this episode.
Fun is a somewhat abstract term
and like many emotions and
many verbal descriptions
of experience.
It falls short in the context of
a neurobiologic goal
discussion about play.
If you have fun, terrific.
Some people might find,
however that engaging in play
is kind of uncomfortable.
Well there, your goal then
should be to lower your level
of discomfort
by focusing less on the outcomes
and just simply engaging
in the behavior because,
well, I'm telling you
that it's good for you,
but hopefully you will tell yourself
that it's good for you
and that you will experience
that it's good for you.
The literature certainly points to that.
And the literature certainly
points to the fact that
play is the way that we are built.
We are built to play.
We have brain circuits from back to front
and within our body that are there
for play and they don't disappear.
They do not get pruned away
as we go from development to adulthood.
So if ever you needed a
neurobiological explanation
for why play is important
throughout the lifespan,
it's that.
It's that biology does
not waste resources.
It's a extremely efficient.
And were the circuits for
play not to be important
in adulthood.
They would've been pruned
away, but I guarantee you,
they are there in your brain
and nervous system now,
they will be there tomorrow
and they will be there going forward.
So my suggestion is that you use them.
One hour per week.
If you're learning from and
or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube Channel.
That's at terrific zero
cost way to support us.
In addition,
please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify
and or Apple
and on Apple,
you have the opportunity to leave us up
to a five star review.
Please leave us comments and
suggestions and feedback,
including suggestions
for future podcast guests
in the comments section on YouTube,
we do read all those comments.
Please also check out
the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of the episode,
that's the best way to
support this podcast.
We also have a Patreon it's
patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And there you can support
the podcast at any level
that you like.
If you're not already following
us on Twitter and Instagram,
we are hubermanlab on Twitter
and also hubermanlab on Instagram,
on Instagram,
I do short posts that
are related to topics
covered on the podcast, but
also some additional topics.
So these would include science based tools
for things like focus for sleep,
for learning and many
other topics as well.
In previous episodes of
the Huberman Lab Podcast,
we often refer to supplements.
Now supplements aren't necessary
or correct for everybody,
but many people derive
tremendous benefit from them
for things like sleep and focus and so on.
We've partnered with
Thorne that's T H O R N E
because Thorn supplements are
of the very highest quality
in terms of the ingredients they use.
And the specificity of the
amounts of the ingredients
that are listed on the bottle
are actually what is in those bottle,
which is not the case for many
supplement brands out there.
If you're interested in
seeing the supplements
that I take, you can go
to thorne.com/u/huberman
So that's thorne.com/u/huberman.
And those supplements you
can purchase at 20% off.
And if you navigate deeper
into the Thorne site,
through that URL portal,
you can also get 20% off
any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
Thank you once again,
for joining me for this discussion
about the incredible
biology and psychology
and power of this thing that we call play
and last but certainly not least
thank you for your interest in science.
[Upbeat music]